[Draft] Data layer overview (#37615)
WordPress/gutenberg: docs/getting-started/data.md

# Gutenberg data layer

## Pre-requisites

> This doc assumes you are familiar with Redux concepts like action, reducer, and selector, as well as certain Gutenberg concepts like _Thunks_. You may still be able to get the gist of the ideas here without these pre-requisites, but you are highly encouraged to get familiar with them first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This doc assumes you are familiar with [Redux](https://redux.js.org/) concepts such as actions, reducers, and selectors, as well as certain Gutenberg concepts such as _Thunks_. You may still be able to get the gist of the ideas here without these pre-requisites, but you are highly encouraged to get familiar with them first.
```

> This doc assumes you are familiar with Redux concepts like action, reducer, and selector, as well as certain Gutenberg concepts like _Thunks_. You may still be able to get the gist of the ideas here without these pre-requisites, but you are highly encouraged to get familiar with them first.

Reviewer 2: Thunks aren't a Gutenberg-specific concept, though if we're using them in a specific way in Gutenberg, it might be helpful to link to an explanation of our use of them.

## Big Ideas

> Gutenberg is part of WordPress core and frequently acts on the same data. There are posts, pages, taxonomies, widgets, navigation items and so on. The obvious way of using the data, would be to just request it from API whenever a given React component needs it. This would have a serious drawback, though. Any other component wanting to use the same data, would have to request it too. So now there is more than one request. Then, what if the data changes? Would all components re-request it? Would they even know?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gutenberg is part of WordPress core and frequently acts on the same data. There are posts, pages, taxonomies, widgets, navigation items and so on. The obvious way of using the data, would be to just request it from API whenever a given React component needs it. This would have a serious drawback though. Any other component wanting to use the same data, would have to request it as well. So now there is more than one request. Then, what if the data changes? Would all components re-request it? Would they even know to do so?
```

> The data layer provides answers to all of these questions, and more. It handles data synchronization for you, so you can focus on your component. For example, when you need to do something with a post, you can access it with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data layer provides answers to all of these questions and more. It handles data synchronization for you, so you can focus on your component. For example, when you need to do something with a post, you can access it with:
```

```js

> function MyComponent({ widgetId }) {

Reviewer: This seemed strange to me when I read it. You referenced the term `post` but then this example is specific to Widgets.

	const widget = useSelect(
		select => select( coreStore ).getWidget( widgetId )
	);

	// ...
}
```

> And be sure that it’s the most recent version, and that no unnecessary HTTP requests were performed. How does it all work? There are a few big concepts to discuss:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, you can be sure that it’s the most recent version, and that no unnecessary HTTP requests were performed. But how does it all work? There are a few big concepts to discuss:
```

> * Data package
> 	* Selectors and resolvers 
> 	* React hooks
> * Core-data package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Data package (`@wordpress/data`)
	* Selectors and resolvers 
	* React hooks
* Core-data package (`@wordpress/core-data`)
```

	* Entities
	* Entity Records
	* Data flow
		* Reading Entity Records
		* Editing Entity Records
		* Saving Entity Records
		* Deleting Entity Records

# Data package
## Selectors and resolvers

> Selectors are simple functions that return a piece of data from the redux store. Resolvers are used to load the data when there is none available yet. Let’s see how they work in tandem in this minimal store:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Selectors are simple functions that return a piece of data from the store. Resolvers are used to load the data when there is none available yet. Let’s see how they work in tandem in this minimal store:
```

Nit: do we need to use the term "redux" here? Just a thought.

```js
const store = wp.data.createReduxStore( 'thermostat', {
	// Essential functions
	selectors: {

> 		getTemperatureCelcius: ( state ) => state.temperature,

Reviewer 3: Replace `Celcius` with `Celsius` everywhere.

		getTemperatureFarenheit: ( state ) => state.temperature * 1.8 + 32
	},
	resolvers: {
		getTemperatureCelcius: () => ( { dispatch } ) => {
			dispatch.receiveTemperature( 10 );
		}
	},

	// Utility functions
	__experimentalUseThunks: true,
	actions: {
		receiveTemperature: ( temperature ) => ({
			type: 'RECEIVE_TEMPERATURE',
			temperature
		})
	},

> 	reducer(state={}, action) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	reducer( state={}, action ) {
```

		const newState = {
			...state
		}
		if ( action.type === 'RECEIVE_TEMPERATURE' ) {
			newState.temperature = action.temperature;
		} else if ( action.type === '@@INIT' ) {
			newState.temperature = 0;
		}
		return newState;
	}
} );
wp.data.register(store)
```

> The `@@INIT` action is dispatched when the store is instantiated, and so the initial state says `temperature: 0`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `@@INIT` action is dispatched when the store is instantiated, and so the initial state says `temperature: 0`.
```

### Simple selectors

> The  `getTemperatureFarenheit` is a simple selector, it predictably returns `0` once the store was instantiated:

Reviewer: _Why_ is it considered simple?

Reviewer 2: Not sure I understand this example. The selector structure led me to assume the temperature was stored in Celsius. If the initial temperature is 0, won't that be 32 in Farenheit?

We already have a decent overview of how selectors etc. work [here](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/packages/packages-data/) so perhaps we should just reference that example?

```js
> wp.data.select('my-store').getTemperatureFarenheit()
0
```

Note we didn’t provide the  `state` as an argument. The Gutenberg data layer handles that for us.

### Memoized selectors

> dependency for other selectors

Reviewer: I didn't understand why this sentence is here. Is this section complete?

Author: I think it's a placeholder I left to fill in later.

```js
import createSelector from 'rememo';

// This selector will only calculate the return value once,
// as long as `state.temperature` remains the same.
getTemperatureFarenheit: createSelector(
	// The selector
	( state ) => state.temperature * 1.8 + 32,

	// The reference(s) upon which the computation depends:
	( state ) => [ state.temperature ]
)
```

Read more about memoized selectors in [rememo](https://github.com/aduth/rememo) package documentation.

### Resolved selectors
`getTemperatureCelcius` is more special as there is a resolver registered under the same name. When `getTemperatureCelcius` is called for the first time, it will receive the current state and return `0`, but the data layer will also call the related resolver. Since our resolver populates the state with the temperature, the second call will return the actual data:

> ```js
> > wp.data.select('thermostat').getTemperatureCelcius()
> 0
> > wp.data.select('thermostat').getTemperatureCelcius()
> 10
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js
> wp.data.select('thermostat').getTemperatureCelcius() // triggers related resolver as there is currently no data
0
> wp.data.select('thermostat').getTemperatureCelcius() // now returns data provided by resolver
10
```
```

Once the data is loaded, `getTemperatureFarenheit` can do something with it:
```js
> wp.data.select('thermostat').getTemperatureFarenheit()
50
```

As we’re about to learn, the resolvers may be asynchronous. How do you know when the data becomes available? The easiest way is to use the `resolveSelect` utility instead of `select`:
```js
> wp.data .resolveSelect('thermostat') .getTemperatureCelcius() .then(( temperature ) => console.log( temperature ))
10
```

> `resolveSelect` returns a promise that waits until the resolver finishes, runs the selector, then yields the final value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`resolveSelect` returns a promise that _waits until the resolver finishes_, runs the selector, then yields the final value.
```

Author: Do you think the italics are useful here?

### Resolvers
Let’s zoom into our resolver:
```js
getTemperatureCelcius: () => ( { dispatch } ) => {
	dispatch.receiveTemperature( 10 );
}
```

> It is a [thunk](thunks%20link) that populates the state. Note  that it does not return anything, nor there are any assumptions on how the data is loaded. The sole goal of this function is to populate the state, and it does so by dispatching the `receiveTemperature` action when the data is ready.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is a [thunk](thunks%20link) that populates the state. Note that it does not return anything, nor there are any assumptions on how the data is loaded. The sole goal of this function is to populate the state, and it does so by dispatching the `receiveTemperature` action when the data is ready.
```

Reviewer 2: ...nor _are there_ any assumptions...

In real world, data is often stored in APIs and needs to be loaded asynchronously. Fortunately, resolvers can be async too. Here’s a different way of loading the temperature:
```js

> getTemperatureCelcius: () => ( { dispatch } ) => {
>     const response = await window.fetch( '/temperature' );
>     const result = await response.json();
>     dispatch.receiveCurrentTemperature( result.temperature );
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
getTemperatureCelcius: () => async ( { dispatch } ) => {
    const response = await window.fetch( '/temperature' );
    const result = await response.json();
    dispatch.receiveCurrentTemperature( result.temperature );
}
```

Do we need to make this `async`?

```

> An avid reader may ask at this point _Is this going to send a request every time I use the `getTemperatureCelcius()` selector?_ Great question! The answer is no, thanks to the resolvers cache. 

Reviewer 2: I'd use "attentive" rather than "avid" here.

### Resolvers cache

> Resolvers are cached by the data layer. Subsequent calls to the same selectors will not trigger additional HTTP requests. Let’s take a closer look at the `thermostat ` store. Once it is registered with `wp.data.register(store)`, the actual state looks as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Resolvers are cached by the data layer. Subsequent calls to the same selectors will not trigger additional HTTP requests. 

Let’s take a closer look at the `thermostat ` store. Once it is registered with `wp.data.register(store)`, the actual state looks as follows:
```

```js
{
  metadata: {},
  root: {
    temperature: 0
  }
}
```

> The state managed by the developer lives in `root`, and the state managed by the `data` package lives in `metadata`.  Let’s take a closer look at the latter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The state managed by the developer lives in `root`, and the state managed by the `@wordpress/data` package lives in `metadata`.  Let’s take a closer look at the latter.
```

> Once the `getTemperatureCelcius` **selector** is called for the first time:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Firstly we call the `getTemperatureCelcius` **selector** for the first time:
```

```js
> wp.data.select('thermostat').getTemperatureCelcius()
null
```

> First, `getTemperatureCelcius` does not refer to the same function as we originally registered with the store (`( state ) => state.temperature`). Instead, the `data` package replaced it with a „resolved” version using the [mapResolvers](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/blob/5dbf7ca8a285f5cab65ebf7ab87dafeb6118b6aa/packages/data/src/redux-store/index.js#L366-L442) utility. The function we’re actually calling is [`selectorResolver`](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/blob/5dbf7ca8a285f5cab65ebf7ab87dafeb6118b6aa/packages/data/src/redux-store/index.js#L388) . It does two things:

Reviewer: > ...the same function as we originally registered

Are we referring to the selector or the resolver here?

As a store developer, you never need to worry about the `resolversCache` API. It is internal, and resolves to resolve the unique timing challenges of the  `data` module. Outside of the data module you may lean on resolvers metadata.

#### Metadata cache

The resolver call is surrounded by two special actions: `START_RESOLUTION` and `FINISH_RESOLUTION`. If we peeked at the dispatch history after `getTemperatureCelcius()` is initially called, it would look like this:

```js
{
  type: 'START_RESOLUTION',
  selectorName: 'getTemperatureCelcius',
  args: []
}

{
  type: 'RECEIVE_TEMPERATURE',
  temperature: 10
}

{
  type: 'FINISH_RESOLUTION',
  selectorName: 'getTemperatureCelcius',
  args: []
}
```

The second, third, and any other call would not call any additional `dispatch` calls thanks to `resolversCache()`.

This is how the Redux state looks like after the `FINISH_RESOLUTION`:
```js
{
  metadata: {
    getTemperatureCelcius: /*
		A mapping with one entry:
		[] => false
	*/
  },
  root: {
    temperature: 10
  }
}
```
It means that the resolution of `getTemperatureCelcius` with an empty arguments list (`[]`) is not running at the time (`false`).

> As you may notice, the resolution is cached per arguments list. If we called the selector with a bogus argument:

Reviewer 2: Where is the bogus argument? Should it be in the example below?

Author: Yes! Great catch

```
> wp.data.select('thermostat').getTemperatureCelcius()
10
```
It would run the resolver again and create a new metadata entry like this:
```js
{
  metadata: {
    getTemperatureCelcius: /*
		A mapping with two entries:
		[] => false
		[2] => false
	*/
  },
  root: {
    temperature: 10
  }
}
```

> How is this useful? It allows you to the resolution state of your data.

Reviewer 2: The second sentence reads like it's missing a word, or am I not getting it?

Author: It is missing a word, I'll turn it into `How is this useful? It allows you to check the resolution state of your data via metadata selectors.` for now

`invalidateResolution`  removes the specified entry from the metadata cache. Here’s how it works:

```
> wp.data.select('thermostat').getTemperatureCelcius()
0   // Initial value
> wp.data.select('thermostat').getTemperatureCelcius()
10  // Resolved reading value
// ... a few minutes pass ...
> wp.data.select('thermostat').getTemperatureCelcius()
10  // Redux state is still the same

> wp.data.dispatch('thermostat').invalidateResolution('getTemperatureCelcius', [])
Promise {<fulfilled>: {…}}  // The resolution was invalidated

> wp.data.select('thermostat').getTemperatureCelcius()
10  // Remember, selector returns the current value before resolving
    // The resolver runs again only now.
> wp.data.select('thermostat').getTemperatureCelcius()
15
```

# Core-data package
As the name `core-data` says, this package connects WordPress core and the `data`  package. To explain how it can be useful in everyday development, we need to discuss a few key concepts first.

## Entities

> Entities are like data types. A Post is an entity, so is a Taxonomy and a Widget. We will use the latter as our running example. Default entities are declared in `entities.js`, and a minimal definition looks like this:

Reviewer 2: "Entities are like data types" sounds a little vague. How else can we define them? Something like "objects" or "types of content" maybe?

Because each entity corresponds to a REST API endpoint, might it be helpful to add that entities are equivalent to [REST API "resources"](https://developer.wordpress.org/rest-api/glossary/#resource)?

Author: I like the REST metaphor! How about something like below? I used three different examples to have a better chance of shoehorning this on top of some prior knowledge the reader has.

> An entity is a basic unit of information in core-data. Entities are conceptually similar to REST API resources, database entries, and class objects. A Post is an entity, so is a Taxonomy and a Widget.

```js
[
	{ id: "block", sidebar: "header", ...},
	{ id: "block-2", sidebar: "header", ...},
]
```

_But you said I don’t need to request the data, I may just select it instead._
That’s correct! The data layer happily handles all the heavy lifting for you.

## Data flow

The Redux state used by `core-data` resembles this one structure:

```js
{
	entities: {
		data: {
			root: {
				widgets: {
					queriedData: null
				}
			}
		}
	}
}
```

### Reading Entity Records

#### `getEntityRecords()`

The `core-data` store provides a named selector for each of the default entities. There is `getTaxonomies()`, `getWidgets()`, and so on. These selectors are not actually implemented from scratch: `getWidgets()` is merely a shorthand for `getEntityRecords( 'root', 'widget' )`

This is what a slightly simplified implementation of [getEntityRecords()]([https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/blob/d1c41d49fc040e44fa11730bee3dd7fe315b2b3f/packages/core-data/src/selectors.js#L294-L306]) looks like:
```js

> export function getEntityRecords( state, kind, name, query ) {

Reviewer 2: I'd leave this out, as the source code isn't that much harder to read :) (also, the "name" parameter never gets used in this example, and there's a "type" magically appearing below)

Author: I agree, great point

	return getQueriedItems(
		state.entities.data[kind][type].queriedData,
		query
	);
}
```

* `kind` and `name` arguments point to the correct Entity
* `query` is an optional HTTP query that can help with things like filtering and pagination

#### Resolution
The [`getEntityRecords` resolver]([https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/blob/d1c41d49fc040e44fa11730bee3dd7fe315b2b3f/packages/core-data/src/resolvers.js#L167]) calls the Entity’s `baseURL` :

```js
const entity = find( entities, { kind, name } );
// ...additional checks...
const path = addQueryArgs( entity.baseURL, {
	...entity.baseURLParams,
	...query,
} );

let records = Object.values( await apiFetch( { path } ) );
// ...additional checks...
dispatch.receiveEntityRecords( kind, name, records, query );

> ```

Reviewer 2: I think here, and also in the selector above, it might be more helpful to just state what the function actually does, e.g. for the selector, "it returns the queried items if they exist" and for the resolver "it queries the REST API and fetches the results". 

Something to consider when adding code samples of internals to docs is that they can easily become outdated when the actual code changes 😅 so it's better to just link to the source code and let folks read through that.

Author: Great note, I just updated that
